MINUTES FOR THE REGULAR MEETING
OF THE CITY COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SPRINGVILLE, UTAH
COUNCIL CHAMBERS, 110 SOUTH MAIN STREET
MARCH 19, 2014 – 7:00 P.M.
The following are the minutes of the Regular Meeting of the Springville City Council. The
meeting was held on Wednesday, March 19, 2014, at 7:00 p.m. in the Springville City Civic
Center Council Chambers, 110 South Main Street, Springville, Utah. Adequate notice of this
meeting, as required by law, was posted in the Civic Center and on the City’s website, and
delivered to members of the Council, media, and interested citizens.
Mayor Wilford W. Clyde presided. In addition to Mayor Clyde, the following were present:
Council Member Rick Child, Council Member Craig Conover, Council Member Christopher
Creer, Council Member Dean Olsen, Council Member Chris Sorensen, City Administrator Troy
Fitzgerald, Assistant City Administrator/City Attorney John Penrod, Assistant City
Administrator/Finance Director Bruce Riddle and City Recorder Kim Rayburn. Also present
were: Community Development Director Fred Aegerter, Public Safety Director Scott Finlayson,
Administrative Services Manager Rod Oldroyd, Power Director Leon Fredrickson, Power
Generation Superintendent Matt Hancock and Museum of Art Director Dr. Rita Wright.
CALL TO ORDER
Mayor Clyde welcomed those present, and called the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m.
INVOCATION AND PLEDGE
Councilmember Sorensen offered the invocation. Councilmember Olsen asked Boy
Scouts Justin Larsen and Malachi Bernard to lead the Pledge of Allegiance.
APPROVAL OF THE MEETING'S AGENDA
COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER MOVED TO APPROVE THE MEETING AGENDA
AS WRITTEN. COUNCIL MEMBER OLSEN SECONDED THE MOTION. ALL VOTED IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED UNANIMOUSLY.
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
There were no minutes to approve.
MAYOR'S COMMENTS
Mayor Clyde welcomed Boy Scouts representing six different troops and students present
at the meeting.
PUBLIC COMMENT:
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 1 of 14

Mayor Clyde explained that any comments relevant to the Public Hearing Agenda would
be heard during each respective discussion item.
Mayor Clyde invited Ms. Wendy LeFever to comment on the marquee at the Springville
Junior High School. Ms. LeFever was concerned with the placement of the marquee and noted
that it is not in compliance with the zoning requirements. She thought it made sense for a school
to want a marquee; however, the matter needs to be addressed in a timely manner, preferably
before school starts again in the fall.
Mayor Clyde invited Ms. Emily Windham to come forward and share her comments on
the crosswalk located at Main Street and 100 South. Ms. Windham stated that drivers usually
don’t stop at the intersection. She asked what measures can be taken for it to be clearly
recognized as a crosswalk. Mayor Clyde stated that UDOT is responsible for the road and there
are plans to make improvements to it this summer. City Administrator, Troy Fitzgerald, added
that the Police and Public Works Departments are in the process of coordinating with UDOT on
possible solutions. Mayor Clyde suggested using flags at the crosswalk in the meantime.
Ms. Kathryn Taylor reported that as she was distributing bags for the Scouting for Food
drive, she noticed that there is a large opening in the fence between Glenwood Drive and the
creek. She was concerned that this may present a safety concern for children who live and walk
along the road. Mayor Clyde assured Ms. Taylor that City staff would look into fixing the fence.
CEREMONIAL AGENDA
1. Presentation of the Mayor’s Awards – Shannon Acor, ASAP Coordinator. Mayor
Clyde noted because of the date change of this meeting this item will be moved to
April 15, 2014
2. A Proclamation declaring April as Child Abuse Prevention Month
Mayor Clyde read the Proclamation declaring April as Child Abuse Prevention Month.
COUNCIL MEMBER SORENSEN MOVED THAT THE CITY COUNCIL ADOPT
THE PROCLAMATION AS READ. COUNCIL MEMBER CHILD SECONDED THE
MOTION. ALL VOTED IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED
UNANIMOUSLY.
Mayor Clyde emphasized the importance of this Proclamation, stating that everyone
needs to play an active role in protecting children in the community.
CONSENT AGENDA
3. Approval of all City purchase orders properly signed (SCC §2-10-110(5)).
4. Approval of The Board of Education of Nebo School District, seeking final plat approval
for the Spring Creek Acres, Plat C, a phased residential subdivision to be located at 1470
East 300 South in the R1-10, Residential Single Family Zone – Fred Aegerter,
Community Development Director.

Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 2 of 14

5. Consideration of a change order on Phase One of the Runway Shift/Extension project
on behalf of the Spanish Fork/Springville Airport – Bruce Riddle, Assistant City
Administrator/Finance Director.
6. Consideration of UAMPS Pool Lock-In Appendices for Firm Market power resource
– Leon Fredrickson, Power Director.
7. Approval of a Class A Beer License for Seven Eleven Store #36341 located at 1730
West 400 South – Kim Rayburn, City Recorder.
COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER MOVED TO APPROVE THE CONSENT
AGENDA, AS WRITTEN. COUNCIL MEMBER OLSEN SECONDED THE MOTION.
VOTE ON MOTION: COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER – AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER
CHILD – AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER SORENSEN – AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER OLSEN –
AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER CREER – NAY. THE MOTION PASSED 4-to-1.
PUBLIC HEARING AGENDA
8) Public Hearing to consider an Ordinance adopting the amended Springville City
General Plan to include the Historic Center Community Plan – Community
Development Director Fred Aegerter. CONTINUED FROM MARCH 4, 2014 CITY
COUNCIL MEETING.
Director Aegerter introduced Ad Hoc Committee Members, Genevieve Baker and Ben
Henderson, and noted that they will be presenting this item.
Ms. Baker explained that Springville's General Plan includes a more specific look at the
residential areas within the City. While there are many similarities between each of the
communities, there are also specific areas that have their own unique issues. Ms. Baker
presented a map showing the area designated as the Historic Center, which is where Springville
was first established over 150 years ago. A graph was presented showing data from the 2010
census, comparing the population groups to the overall population of the Historic District and the
City of Springville. Ms. Baker described the concentration level of each age group and
suggested the data be used to encourage families of all ages to stay in the area.
Ms. Baker thanked the Council, Planning Commission, and City staff for allowing the
committee to be a part of the process. She explained that the community involvement process
began with an informational meeting that was attended by over 70 members of the community.
There were 86 specific ideas identified at the meeting. Those ideas were condensed to the top
five by the Ad Hoc Committee and staff. Ms. Baker reported that the five areas of focus were
narrowed down to land use, transportation, housing, community identity and community
facilities, and services. The plan includes background information, goals, and strategies for
achieving those goals for each of the five focus areas.
Ms. Baker further explained each of the five focus areas, beginning with land use. A map
was presented showing that the largest land use percentage in the area is single-family housing.
The second highest use is for street rights-of-way, which speaks to the importance of preserving
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 3 of 14

residential heritage roads, as well as the need to manage the City's transportation and road
facilities. The map also showed a large amount of public use areas, but limited park space. The
overall goal with land use was to preserve the historic open feel and agricultural uses of Plat "A",
while limiting commercial encroachment and investing in expanded green space.
At various meetings, the community expressed concern about maintaining the current
level of density. They hope to minimize encroachment of multi-family dwelling units. Ms.
Baker discussed ways to enforce the current zoning as well maintain interior space on lots. With
regard to commercial properties, the community would also like to see the existing requirements
for landscaping and buffers maintained. Ms. Baker presented examples of properties with and
without landscape buffers and pointed out that the property with the landscape buffer was much
more appealing.
Ms. Baker next expounded on transportation. The Ad Hoc Committee's goal was to
provide and maintain a walkable and bike able community with an emphasis on safety, reduced
traffic congestion, and a clean, quiet feel. This will respect the esthetics of the Historic District.
Ms. Baker pointed out that the majority of accidents in Springville occur along Main Street and
400 South, and the Ad Hoc Committee would like to continue working to complete the highway
access along 1600 South. A proposed route was then presented to the Council.
The Ad Hoc Committee hoped to develop an overall bicycle circulation master plan
throughout Springville and other surrounding communities. Ms. Baker spoke about various
instances along Hobble Creek Trail where children can get through the fencing, which poses
safety concerns. By developing the area into a park, it will become more walkable and inviting
for families and mitigate the safety concerns. With regard to traffic calming, Ms. Baker
suggested installing bulb outs or planted medians. The Ad Hoc Committee also recommended
the City work with UDOT to increase pedestrian safety.
Mr. Ben Henderson next addressed the Council and read a quote from the housing section
of the plan, which specified that changes should encourage preserving the historic past while
recognizing the need to embrace the positive opportunities the future holds for the area.
Mr. Henderson noted that he has only lived in Springville for a couple of years, but his family
was initially drawn to the area for its historic charm. He referenced other cities that have
preserved their historic districts, as opposed to those that have not made preservation efforts.
Mr. Henderson stressed that the Ad Hoc Committee encompassed a very diverse group of
citizens, all with varying perspectives and opinions. He emphasized some issues the committee
focused on such as code enforcement, goals, and strategies. He noted that the committee
recognizes that not all of the ideas can be executed immediately; however, they wanted to be
prepared with a plan for the future.
Mr. Henderson explained that the goal for the housing section of the plan is to promote
well maintained housing and safe neighborhoods while preserving the City’s residential heritage
and building on lasting qualities of beauty and style for future generations. Some of the
strategies included allowing accessory apartment buildings throughout the historic center
community and ensuring that the codes relating to those buildings are enforced. The Ad Hoc
Committee would also like to provide incentives for owner occupied housing throughout the
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 4 of 14

community since this has a noticeable impact on neighborhoods. They would like to adopt a
good landlord program, to ensure that quality renters come to Springville. Furthermore, the
committee would like to commit to protecting single-family homes.
Mr. Henderson suggested adopting design standards for the rehabilitation of existing
structures to help retain the historic character of the City. Additionally, the committee
recommended adopting an ordinance that addresses the issue of demolition by neglect. Mr.
Henderson displayed a picture of a home that had been neglected, and pointed out that it is an
eyesore and attracts crime. He emphasized that the City should encourage historic appearance
with an eye for the future and suggested installing community identification signs within the
district. The Ad Hoc Committee also recommended continuing with the City Street Tree
Program, as several members of the community felt this plays a significant role in the
beautification of Springville.
Mr. Henderson addressed Springville's facilities and services and stated that the
committee's goal is to provide facilities and services that increase property values, safety,
conserve natural resources, and provide enhanced recreational opportunities. Strategies for
accomplishing this goal include exploring future opportunities for pressurized irrigation, curb,
gutter, and sidewalk, and underground power lines. Furthermore, the committee would like to
consider adopting City-wide standards for smaller parks and assess what other cities have done
to include pocket parks in their respective communities. Mr. Henderson then reiterated
comments previously made by Ms. Baker.
After the Ad Hoc Committee met with the Planning Commission, some follow up on
certain issues was required. Mr. Henderson explained that the proposed multi-family residential
units will be located above commercial store fronts as opposed to new apartment complexes.
The committee also felt that the old motels that are being used as apartments should be addressed
through increased code enforcement, due to safety and crime issues.
Another follow-up item related to pedestrian safety on Main Street. Mr. Henderson
commented that while the committee recognizes that Main Street is a highway maintained by
UDOT, they would like the City to work with them in making necessary safety improvements.
Additionally, there is commercial and civic parking that encroach into residential areas. Stricter
code requirements need to be enforced and communicated to new developers. In conclusion,
Mr. Henderson stated that all of the items discussed today will help make the heart of Springville
a better place, and benefit the community as a whole.
Director Aegerter provided clarification on items discussed during joint meetings
between the Planning Commission and Ad Hoc Committee. He recognized and thanked all
members of the committee for their efforts. He explained that staff was seeking direction from
the Council so that a plan can be presented for adoption on April 1, 2014.
The first item of clarification related to multi-family dwelling units. The General Plan
addresses the inclusion of multi-family housing developments in the Towne Center
neighborhood, which extends from 100 East to 100 West, and Center Street to 100 South. The
Ad Hoc Committee proposed that the units above commercial store fronts be allocated for this
type of housing, as opposed to tearing down existing buildings for the construction of complexes
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 5 of 14

that are strictly used for multi-family housing. Director Aegerter asked how the Council would
like to define the matter in the proposed community plan. An aerial map of the subject area was
reviewed and discussed.
Director Aegerter summarized other concerns identified during meetings between the
Planning Commission and Ad Hoc Committee, which were also reviewed by Mr. Henderson.
One of the concerns was the proposal to amend City Code to allow for chickens and bees. It was
noted that the Commission was not in favor of the idea. The next issue involved setting
standards for smaller City parks. The Commission and Committee both agreed on this action.
Lastly, there were unanimous concerns about old motels being used as apartments.
Mayor Clyde opened the public hearing and stated that the hearing will specifically
address the Historic Plan, including the use of chickens in this particular neighborhood.
Jeff Carter stated that he lives in the Historic District and asked questions relative to
design standards for remodeling. He explained that he wants to remodel rather than restore his
home due to the considerable cost difference between each option.
Emily Windham described where she lives in relation to the Historic District and
expressed concern with having multi-family housing in the area. Ms. Windham also asked the
Council to strongly consider allowing chickens in the Historic District, as they help provide an
additional level of self-sufficiency.
Jenny Burrough stated that she is new to Springville and explained that her family moved
to here because they wanted an older home with a large lot. Her family loves the community and
small country feel. Ms. Burrough was surprised to discover that chickens are not allowed in the
Historic District, and pointed out that chickens are family pets and well loved. She had a copy of
Provo City's Ordinance, which contains specific guidelines for maintaining chickens.
Ms. Burrough clarified that chickens should specifically be allowed in the Historic District, and
reiterated that they are an important part of remaining self-sufficient. Lastly, she requested that
curb and gutter be installed in their neighborhood as well.
Ben Larsen stated that he does not live in the Historic District and acknowledged that it
can be difficult to establish ordinances that will benefit a community without taking away
freedom from businesses and homeowners. He encouraged the Council to be cognizant of
whether or not their spending will benefit all citizens, or just a few.
Scott Humble stated that he has lived in the Historic District for 20 years. He pointed out
that in looking at the historical land use of Plat "A" several barns can be identified, all of which
were meant to accommodate small animals. Mr. Humble explained that if the Council wants to
determine how to maintain open spaces, they need to consider allowing citizens to use their land
for the raising of poultry and other small animals. He mentioned that he raises small animals in
another city, and would like to have the option of raising them at his home in Springville's
Historic District as well.
Genevieve Baker made additional comments about honey bees in the Historic District.
She explained that the Historic District has several existing orchards that would benefit from
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 6 of 14

additional pollinators. Allowing honey bees in the Historic District would increase pollination of
the orchards as well family gardens.
Jennifer Quinlin noted that she does not live in the Historic District, however maintaining
Springville's historical value benefits all citizens. She explained that when allowing the
historical value of the City to be watered down, the City loses its identity. She encouraged the
Council to make decisions that will lead the City in a positive direction.
COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER MOVED THAT THE PUBLIC HEARING ON THIS ITEM
BE MOVED TO APRIL 15, 2014. COUNCIL MEMBER CHILD SECONDED THE
MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED WITH THE UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF THE
COUNCIL.
Director Aegerter reviewed each item relevant to the discussion item. He summarized
the first matter, relating to multi-family housing in the Town Center. The proposal was to allow
existing housing facilities to remain, and include additional units above commercial buildings.
He explained that a previous concern with Plat "A" was that it had inadequate parking. Director
Aegerter noted that multi-family housing units are allowed in the Westfield’s, areas on 2600
west and a small portion are located on South Main. There are not areas in the north part of the
City that currently allow for multi-family housing.
Mayor Clyde pointed out that the Town Center will be designed to include several
facilities such as a library, splash pad, civic center, and small businesses to all be within walking
distance of one another. Therefore, this makes the area a desirable location for additional multifamily housing. He felt this should somehow be accomplished, and if done properly could be
very beneficial. Director Aegerter noted that City staff presented illustrations of how
townhouses could be included in the Town Center. The Ad Hoc Committee was very concerned
with the impact they will have on the neighborhood.
Director Aegerter summarized discussions relative to chickens and honey bees in the
Historic District. Mayor Clyde felt it would make more sense to consider whether or not to
allow them throughout the City as a whole, rather than limiting them to just the Historic District.
Director Aegerter reviewed the discussion about parks. The Mayor and Council agreed with the
proposed plan. Discussions relative to old motels being converted to apartments were reviewed.
Mayor Clyde considered them to be an eyesore. Additionally, they pose pedestrian safety issues.
Mayor Clyde identified other blighted areas in the community and felt the Council should
brainstorm ways to foster a more pleasing atmosphere in those areas.
Mayor Clyde explained that code enforcement should not be so restrictive that it prevents
families from moving there, or current residents from properly maintaining or improving their
homes. He suggested offering incentives for keeping properties historical in nature. There was
continued discussion regarding other special improvements to the district, such as curb, gutter,
and sidewalk, power lines, and irrigation. Director Aegerter felt that the entire community
should be involved in deciding what they would be willing to pay for with regard to the proposed
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 7 of 14

improvements. He explained that the items should be considered so that as they come up there is
a plan in place. Mayor Clyde remarked that having power lines in the middle of blocks could be
problematic. Council Member Sorensen added that these issues aren't time sensitive, but goals
for the future. Mayor Clyde thanked the Ad Hoc Committee for their involvement in the project.
9) Public Hearing to consider an Ordinance amending Sections 11-3-402 and 11-4-301
of the Springville Municipal Code pertaining to the keeping of hen chickens – Troy
Fitzgerald, City Administrator.
Administrator Fitzgerald provided a background of the discussion item. He noted that
several individuals approached the Council about keeping hen chickens over the years, and in
2009 and 2010, the Council would not consider the matter. In late November, early December
2010, an ordinance was drafted, however, the Planning Commission voted against adopting it.
Administrator Fitzgerald informed the Council chickens are currently allowed in the R1-15 and
A-1 zones.
Administrator Fitzgerald explained that there are a number of arguments that can be
either for or against the issue. For example, several surrounding cities allow chickens for the
production of eggs. He noted that Springville City's Ordinance is similar to Spanish Fork's
Ordinance and the requirements of the R1-15 and A-1 zones have not changed. Administrator
Fitzgerald reported that the Planning Commission voted against the keeping of backyard
chickens for various reasons. Some included fencing requirements, permit costs, and impacts to
public safety reports due to the lack of changes in the City's nuisance code. In conclusion,
Administrator Fitzgerald stated that staff is mostly neutral on the matter, though some
departments may be affected.
Mayor Clyde opened the public hearing.
Vickie Stulce expressed concern with mice, which are attracted to chicken feed. She
recounted an incident with one of her neighbors who once brought in chickens illegally, and the
mice problem significantly increased. When the chickens went away, so did the mice. Ms.
Stulce explained that chickens flying over the fence also become a nuisance.
Luann Hawker felt that raising chickens contributes to stable neighborhoods, and
allowing them will make Springville a desirable place to live. She explained that citizens are
concerned about whether or not they have the ability to feed their families and some individuals
would decide not to move to Springville if chickens were not allowed. Ms. Hawker felt that a
properly worded ordinance, such as Provo City's, would help mitigate noise and other nuisance
issues. She stated that the ordinance could include recommendations that chickens are kept in
coops, and chicken feed be maintained in rodent-proof containers. Ms. Hawker explained that
she has communicated with several people who are interested in the Historic District for the
purpose of having chickens. Administrator Fitzgerald added that the ordinance currently does
not include language that requires residents keep chicken feed in rodent-proof containers.
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 8 of 14

Jennifer Quinlin was shocked when she found that she could not keep chickens in
Springville. She noted that this was one of the draws for moving to the City in the first place.
She explained that chickens are pets similar to cats and dogs, which roam freely. Ms. Quinlin
noted that citizens aren't required to hide toys and garden equipment and chickens shouldn’t be
any different. She stated that proper dog restraints would prevent attacks on chickens and
indicated that there are many communities in Utah that have adopted this type of an ordinance.
Landon Wilson stated that he has lived in the Historic District for five years and was in
favor of having chickens. He was also shocked when he found that chickens were not allowed in
Springville. Mr. Wilson explained that rats tend to migrate to areas that have food and serious
cleanliness issues. He stated that he has seen dirtier things than chickens in yards. He explained
that gardens that include a variety of plants and bees are becoming a national issue. Lastly, he
pointed out that a permit for chickens is required in Salt Lake City; however, there are no fees.
If there needs to be a fee, it should be minimal and not used as punishment.
Ken DeMille was in favor of the keeping of chickens. He explained that the ordinance is
in line with what should be done, such as having solid fencing and properly contained food. He
felt that the ordinance would benefit all. He also expressed a desire to be involved in the
process.
Josh Daniels supported the keeping of chickens and explained that it is a matter of liberty
and property rights. Historically, property has been used to provide food for one's family.
Mr. Daniels recognized a need for an ordinance and nuisance law to regulate behavior. He
reiterated that property owners should be able to use their land in a reasonable manner. He
encouraged the Council to support the cause.
Karen Esque Wiley explained that one year ago horses were allowed in her
neighborhood, but not chickens. She also spoke about the Tour De Coops in Salt Lake, and
stated that having something similar to this in Springville would be a good way to make money.
Laura Cabanella stated that she is not a resident but she went to high school in
Springville. She serves on the Provo City Council and was asked by a proponent of the
ordinance to speak on the matter. Ms. Cabanella explained that when Provo City passed their
ordinance, there were concerns raised about noise, rodents, and other nuisances. Ms. Cabanella
stated that Provo doesn't allow roosters; however, there are many benefits to keeping chickens.
Provo hasn't seen any major problems with rodents due to thorough requirements listed in the
ordinance that prevent them from migrating to the area. Lastly, Ms. Cabanella spoke about
Provo's beekeeping ordinance and described some of the fears people had when that ordinance
was adopted. Some expressed a fear of bees; however, wasps usually do the stinging.
Thomas Johnson explained that he has made a major investment in his home in
Springville and he believed that not having chickens was a major detraction from that
investment. Mr. Johnson hoped to raise chickens legally, and teach his children how to take care
of themselves.

Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 9 of 14

Amber Kretchmer a resident of the Historic District hoped that the Council would allow
chickens in the area. She felt an ordinance would help regulate them and noted that her
neighbor's dog is more of a nuisance than chickens would be in their neighborhood.
Laura Jones stated that she loves chickens and previously she had a chicken farm in
Arizona. Ms. Jones explained that she never had any problems with wild animals. Her chickens
were well behaved, and they helped control insects. If chickens are well cared for there aren't
any problems with them.
Lee Buckwalter stated that he is a licensed beekeeper. He explained that beekeeping isn't
something that a person can just jump into. There are extensive startup costs, and it is subject to
State inspections. Mr. Buckwalker explained that he kept his hives in Payson near single-family
homes. Responsibility is needed, along with stringent regulations. The same requirements
should apply to dog owners as well.
Joyce Nolte reported that she serves on the Planning Commission and supports the
keeping of chickens. She suggested that passionate citizens form a group and get involved in the
process of dealing with complaints and making reasonable enforcements. Ms. Nolte suggested
that a packet of information be created and distributed to those interested in raising chickens.
Viviane Weight stated that she isn't passionate one way or the other about the matter.
While she personally does not want to raise chickens, she supports passing the ordinance. Ms.
Weight explained that she currently has a neighbor with chickens and she has not noticed any
problems with noise or smell. She commented that she actually has more issues with cats and
dogs. She felt that chickens would not be a problem if a proper ordinance were adopted.
Marcia Harris explained that she lives in a neighborhood where chickens are allowed.
Prior to living there she knew nothing about them. Her husband brought home chickens one day,
and she learned how to take care of them. Ms. Harris stated that she has not had any problems
with noise or smell with her chickens. She noted that she has more problems with dogs and that
there also pheasants and beavers in her neighborhood. Ms. Harris felt that children could learn a
lot by caring for them.
Jared Burrow stated that he previously kept chickens in Provo City and has since brought
them to Springville. He has been very responsible with his chickens by installing solid fencing
and a long chicken run. His children are responsible for taking care of them and the box elder
bugs are all under control.
Caleb Taylor voiced his support for chickens which become a family project that brings
families closer.
Carter Rasmussen reported that he keeps chickens and is a beekeeper. He felt there was a
double standard with cats and dogs and that the City should address what is really allowed in the
community. He stated that if cats and dogs are allowed, the fees and costs should be analyzed.
Georgina Butts felt that fees and costs should be addressed.
Paul Holmer stated that he previously raised chickens in Provo, and that it worked well.
He observed the overwhelming support from the community in moving forward with the
ordinance. He explained that there will be responsible management of chickens and they are
easy to raise. Mr. Holmer recommended the City start off with low fees.
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 10 of 14

Darrell Wilson referenced standards provided by the Department of Agriculture, and
suggested that the number of chickens that a family can keep be reasonable. He has chickens
and they keep his yard clean. Mr. Wilson agreed with previous comments made about having a
more self-sustainable life for his family, and urged the City to not overtax responsible citizens.
Robert Jones stated that he previously lived in Arizona where he kept 200 chickens. He
felt that a $50 fee was too high, and stated that people need more freedom rather than more laws.
He reiterated other comments made about citizen responsibility.
Emily Wilson was happy that the Council was considering allowing chickens. Ms.
Wilson also expressed concern with high fees, and noted that this item is on several planning
committee agendas. She stated that there are more pros than cons when allowing citizens to raise
their own chickens.
There were no further public comments.
COUNCIL MEMBER CREER MOVED THAT THE PUBLIC HEARING ON THIS ITEM BE
CLOSED. COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER SECONDED THE MOTION. ALL PRESENT
VOTED AYE.
The Council discussed the matter. Council Member Sorensen wanted to clarify whether
the ordinance has a fee associated with the raising of chickens. Administrator Fitzgerald replied
that it currently does not have a fee and other details of the ordinance would be worked out in the
next 20 days. Council Member Conover thanked all for coming and stated that the points raised
were well received. He noted that the Ad Hoc Committee was in favor of having chickens in the
Historic District and that he was supportive of allowing them. Council Member Creer felt that
citizens could be trusted in the owning and maintaining chickens.
Council Member Sorensen expressed concern with the ordinance passing for various
reasons. He was concerned with potential trouble with dogs and neighbors who would be
hesitant about reporting problems. He explained that it would be difficult to enforce the
ordinance, which could become costly.
COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER MOVED TO APPROVE ORDINANCE#06-2014
AMENDING SECTIONS 11-3-402 AND 11-4-301 AND ESTABLISHING ARTICLE 8 OF
TITLE 3 CHAPTER 7 OF THE SPRINGVILLE CITY CODE REGARDING CHICKENS.
COUNCIL MEMBER CREER SECONDED THE MOTION. THE VOTE ON MOTION IS
RECORDED AS FOLLOWS: COUNCIL MEMBER CONOVER – AYE, COUNCIL
MEMBER CHILD – AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER CREER – AYE, COUNCIL MEMBER
OLSEN – NAY, COUNCIL MEMBER SORENSEN – AYE. THE MOTION PASSED 4-TO-1.
CLOSED SESSION:
The Springville City Council may temporarily recess the meeting and convene in a
closed session to discuss pending or reasonably imminent litigation, and the purchase,
exchange, or lease of real property, as provided by Utah Code Annotated §52-4-205
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 11 of 14

COUNCILMEMBER CHILD MOVED TO TEMPORARILY ADJOURN AT 9:37 P.M.
AND CONVENE IN A CLOSED SESSION AS PROVIDED BY U.C.A. §52-4-205 FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DISCUSSION PENDING OR REASONABLY IMMINENT LITIGATION
AND THE PURCHASE, EXCHANGE, OR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY.
COUNCILMEMBER CREER SECONDED THE MOTION. THE VOTE IS RECORDED AS
FOLLOWS: COUNCILMEMBER CONOVER – AYE; COUNCILMEMBER OLSEN – AYE;
COUNCILMEMBER CHILD – AYE; COUNCILMEMBER SORENSEN – AYE; AND
COUNCILMEMBER CREER – AYE. THE MOTION CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
THE REGULAR CITY
CONSENSUS AT 9:47 P.M.

COUNCIL

MEETING

WAS

RECONVENED

BY

REGULAR AGENDA
10) Consideration of Approving a Settlement Agreement Between East Bay RV, LLC and
Springville City that would settle current litigation between the two parties. – John
Penrod, Assistant City Administrator / City Attorney.
Attorney Penrod recommended continuing the above item without setting a specific date.
Mayor Clyde invited Mr. Dwayne Cutler to speak. Mr. Cutler was present on behalf of
East Bay RV, LLC, and thanked staff and the Council for their efforts. Mr. Cutler was of the
opinion that the two parties are close to reaching a settlement and that East Bay RV is anxious to
prove themselves as good neighbors. He stated that they are committed to resolving all issues.
11) Consideration of approving an assignment agreement and an easement that would
transfer the ownership of a lift station in the East Bay RV Park to Springville City. – John
Penrod, Assistant City Administrator and City Attorney.
COUNCIL MEMBER CHILD MOVED THAT THE CITY COUNCIL CONTINUE ITEM
NUMBER 10 AND NUMBER 11 AS LISTED IN THE REGULAR AGENDA. COUNCIL
MEMBER OLSEN SECONDED THE MOTION. ALL VOTED IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION. THE MOTION PASSED UNANIMOUSLY.
12) Approval of an Ordinance repealing Title 4 Chapter 2A, "Wastewater Treatment," and
codifying Title 4 Chapter 14 that revises Springville City's sewer collections, water
reclamation, and pretreatment processes and requirements. – Brad Stapley, Public Works
Director.
Attorney Penrod addressed the updates to the sewer ordinance and collections system.
He explained that the item was previously presented and now the State of Utah would like to
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 12 of 14

have it approved by the City and then sent to the State for a 30 day comment period. Attorney
Penrod explained that new language has been added to the sewer ordinance and noted that the
ordinance was last reviewed in 1998. The State wants the City to conform to a model ordinance
to be uniform with other cities across the state. Therefore, a requirement was added that cities
are to pass a permit and send it to the State for their records.
It was noted that the process completely repeals Section 2A of the Code and implements
Chapter 14. Attorney Penrod explained that there are several time constraints with the
permitting process. The ordinance clearly defines ownership of sewer laterals. Revisions are
also made to septic tank requirements, so that new health requirements can be implemented.
Attorney Penrod explained that not all septic tanks have permits and measures need to be taken
so that permits are acquired and recorded properly. It was noted that there are local limitations
with prohibited discharge and significant industrial users are required to obtain permits.
Attorney Penrod mentioned that Juan Garrido, Water Reclamation and Storm Water
Superintendent and Rick Roberts, Water Reclamation Plant Supervisor have done a great job
with the system. Mr. Garrido and Mr. Roberts have helped businesses maintain compliance and
have worked with the State on their behalf.
Pre-treatment facilities and the dumping of wastewater dumping into the system were
discussed. Attorney Penrod stated that wastewater from other jurisdictions that flows into
Springville’s system will also need to meet the ordinance requirements.
Attorney Penrod discussed the way the proposed ordinance deals with confidential
information and managing trade secrets. He emphasized the importance of enforcing all related
policies, and explained that violators will be notified and instructed on how to come back into
compliance. In some cases, a cause hearing will be required. He defined and provided further
explanation of Cease and Desist Orders and Injunctive Relief. Lastly, Attorney Penrod stated
that civil penalties and criminal prosecution are required by the State.
Attorney Penrod reiterated that the ordinance is proposed to comply with all of the State's
requirements. Council Member Sorensen added that after the waiting period is over, the City can
review the ordinance and make any necessary changes.
COUNCIL MEMBER CHILD MOVED TO APPROVE ORDINANCE #07-2014 REPEALING
TITLE 4 CHAPTER 2A, "WASTEWATER TREATMENT," AND CODIFYING TITLE 4
CHAPTER 14 THAT REVISES SPRINGVILLE CITY'S SEWER COLLECTIONS, WATER
RECLAMATION, AND PRETREATMENT PROCESSES AND REQUIREMENTS.
COUNCIL MEMBER CREER SECONDED THE MOTION. THE VOTE IS RECORDED AS
FOLLOWS: COUNCILMEMBER OLSEN – AYE; COUNCILMEMBER CHILD – AYE;
COUNCILMEMBER CREER – AYE; COUNCILMEMBER SORENSEN – AYE; AND
COUNCILMEMBER CONOVER – AYE. THE MOTION CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
MAYOR, COUNCIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTS
Council Member Sorensen asked about the golf course and snack bar. It was noted that
Finance Director, Bruce Riddle, has asked twice for a proposal and has pursued solicitations to
get an idea of overall interest. Director Riddle described strategies for next year's budget, such
Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 13 of 14

as getting into the restaurant business. Council Member Sorensen emphasized that this is a
critical part of the golf course. Director Riddle replied that there has been very little interest
from the private sector. There was continued discussion on the matter.
Administrator Fitzgerald announced that Director Stapley lost a child recently and
provided information about the upcoming funeral. Attorney Penrod relayed that Director Stapley
would like to still put pipes in on South Main Street. It was noted that UDOT is only allowed to
close roads on weekends, so businesses on the street should be unaffected.
Council Member Sorensen asked if Art City Days will be affected by road construction.
Administrator Fitzgerald replied that the contractual agreement states that construction should
not take place during Art City Days. Attorney Penrod added that he and Director Stapley will
notify all businesses before closing Main Street.
Mayor Clyde reported that a former City Council Member recently passed away.
Administrator Fitzgerald stated that he would send an acknowledgement to the family.
ADJOURNMENT
COUNCIL MEMBER CHILD MOVED TO ADJOURN THE REGULAR COUNCIL
MEETING AT 10:16 PM. COUNCIL MEMBER CREER SECONDED THE MOTION AND
ALL VOTED AYE

Springville City Council March 19, 2014
APPROVED WITH CORRECTIONS – June 3, 2014

Page 14 of 14

